the idea of eliminating poverty is a
great goal I don't think anyone in this
room would disagree what worries me is
when politicians with money and
charismatic rockstars use the words it
all just sounds so so simple now I've
got no bucket of money today and I've
got no policy to release and I certainly
haven't got a guitar I'll leave that to
others but I do have an idea
and that idea is called housing for
health housing for health works with
poor people it works in the places where
they live and the work is done to
improve their health over the last
twenty eight years this tough grinding
dirty work has been done by literally
thousands of people around Australia and
more recently overseas and their work
has proven that focus design can improve
even the poorest living environments it
can improve health and it can play a
part in reducing if not eliminating
poverty I'm going to start where the
story began 1985 in Central Australia
a man called yummy Lester an Aboriginal
man was running a Health Service 80% of
what walked in the door in terms of
illness was infectious disease third
world developing world infectious
disease caused by a poor living
environment
yummy assembled a team in Alice Springs
he got a medical doctor he got an
environmental health guy and he hand
selected a team of local Aboriginal
people to work on this project Yami told
us at that first meeting there's no
money
or was a good start no money you have
six months and I want you to start on a
project which in his language he called
you Ankara Palin kokkonen Jakob which
translated is a plan to stop people
getting sick a profound brief there was
our task first step the medical doctor
went away for about six months and he
worked on what would have become these
nine health goals what were we aiming at
after six months of work he came to my
office and presented me with those nine
words on a piece of paper now I was very
very unimpressed come on Big Ideas need
big words and preferably a lot of them
this didn't fit the bill what I didn't
see and what you can't see was that he'd
assembled thousands of pages of local
national and international health
research that filled out the picture as
to why these were the health targets the
pictures that came a bit later had a
very simple reason original people who
are our bosses and the senior people
were most commonly illiterate so the
story had to be told in pictures of what
were these goals we work with the
community not telling them what was
going to happen in a language they
didn't understand so we had the goals
and each one of these goals and I won't
go through them all puts at the center
the person and their health issue and it
then connects them to the bits of the
physical environment that are actually
needed to keep their health good and the
highest priority you see on the screen
is washing people once a day
particularly children and I hope most of
you are thinking what that sounds simple
now I'm going to ask you all a very
personal question this morning before
you came who could have had a wash using
a shower
I'm not gonna ask you if you had a
shower because I'm too polite that's it
okay all right I think it's fair to say
most people here could have had a shower
this morning I'm going to ask you to do
some more work I want you all to select
one of the houses of the 25 houses you
see on the screen I want you to select
one of them and note the position of
that house and keep that in your head
have you all got a house I'm going to
ask you to live there for a few months
so make sure you got it right it's in
the northwest of Western Australia very
pleasant place okay let's see if your
shower in that house is working I hear
some aahs and I hear some are if you get
a green tick your showers working you
and your kids are fine if you get a Red
Cross well I've looked carefully around
the room and it's not going to make much
difference to this crew why because
you're all too old and I know that's
going to come as a shock to some of you
but you are and before you get offended
and leave I've got to say that being too
old in this case means that pretty much
everyone in the room I think is over
five years of age we're really concerned
with kids not to five and why washing is
the antidote to the sort of bugs the
common infectious diseases of the eyes
the ears the chest and the skin that if
they occur in the first five years of
life permanently damage those organs
they leave a lifelong remnant that means
that by the age of five you can't see as
well for the rest of your life you can't
hear as well for the rest of your life
you can't breathe as well you've lost a
third of your lung capacity by the age
of five and even skin infection which we
originally thought wasn't that big a
problem mial skin infections naught to
five give you a greatly increased chance
of renal failure needing dialysis at age
40 this is a big deal so the ticks and
crosses on the screen are actually
critical for young kids those ticks and
crosses represent the 7,800 houses we've
looked at nationally around Australia
the same proportion what you see on the
screen 35% of those not so famous houses
lived in by 50,000 indigenous people 35%
had a working shower 10 percent of those
same 7,800 houses had safe electrical
systems and 58% of those houses had a
working toilet these are by a simple
standard test in the case of the shower
does it have hot and cold water two taps
that work a shower rows to get water
onto your head or onto your body and a
drain that takes the water away not
well-designed not beautiful not elegant
just that they function and the same
tests for the electrical system and the
toilets housing health projects aren't
about measuring failure they're actually
about improving houses we start on day
one of every project we've learned we
don't make promises we don't do a report
we arrive in the morning with tools tons
of equipment trades and we train up a
local team on the first day to start
work by the evening of the first day a
few houses in that community are better
than when we started in the morning that
work continues for six to twelve months
until all the houses are improved and
we've spent our budget of seven and a
half thousand dollars total per house
that's our average budget at the end of
six months to a year we test every house
again it's very easy to spend money it's
very difficult to improve the function
of all those parts of a house and for a
whole house the nine healthy living
practices we test check and fix two
hundred and fifty items in every house
and these are the results we can get
with our seven and a half thousand
dollars we can get showers up to eighty
six percent working we can get
electrical systems up to seventy seven
percent working and we can get 90
percent of toilets working in those
seven and a half thousand houses
thank you
the teams do a great job and that's
their work I think there's an obvious
question that I hope you're thinking
about why do we have to do this work why
are the houses in such poor condition
70% of the work we do is due to lack of
routine maintenance so sort of things
that happen in all our houses things
wear out should have been done by state
government or local government simply
not done the house doesn't work 21
percent of the things we fix a due to
faulty construction literally things
that are built upside down and back to
front they don't work we have to fix
them and if you've lived in Australia in
the last 30 years the final cause you
will have heard always that indigenous
people trash houses it's one of the
almost rock-solid pieces of evidence
which I've never seen evidence for
that's always ruled out as that's the
problem with indigenous housing well 9
percent of what we spend is damage
misuse or abuse of any sort we argue
strongly that the people living in the
house are simply not the problem and
will go a lot further than that the
people living in the house are actually
a major part of the solution 75% of our
national team in Australia over 75 at
the minute are actually local indigenous
people from the communities we work in
they do all aspects of the work
in 2010 for example they were 831 all
over Australia and the tourist trade
islands all states working to improve
the houses where they and their families
live and that's an important thing
our works always had a focus on on
health that's the key the developing
world Berg trachoma causes blindness
it's a developing world illness and yet
the picture you see behind is in an
Aboriginal community in the late 1990s
where 95 percent of school-age kids had
active trachoma in their eyes doing
damage okay what do we do well first
thing we do we get showers working why
because that flushes the bug out we put
washing facilities in the school as well
so kids can wash their face as many
times during the day we wash the bug out
second the eye doctors tell us that dust
scours the eye and lets the bug in quick
so what do we do we call up the doctor
of dust and there is such a person he
was loaned to us by a mining company he
controls dust on mining company sites
and he came out and within a day it
worked out that most dust in this
community was within a meter of the
ground the wind-driven dust so he
suggested making mounds to catch the
dust before it went into the house area
and affected the eyes of kids so we used
dirt to stop dust we did it he provided
us dust monitors we tested and we
reduced the dust then we wanted to get
rid of the bug generally so how do we do
that well we call up the doctor of flies
and yes there is a doctor of flies as
our Aboriginal mate said you white
fellows ought to get out more
and the doctoral flies very quickly
determined that there was one fly that
carried the bug he could give school
kids in this community the beautiful
flytrap you see above in the slide they
could trap the flies send her to him in
Perth when the bug was in the gut he'd
send back by return post some dung
beetles the dung beetles ate the camel
dung the Flies died through lack of food
and trachoma dropped and over the Year
truck home had dropped radically in this
place and stayed low we did we change
the environment not just treated the
eyes and finally you get a good eye all
these small health gains and and small
pieces of the puzzle make a big
difference in New South Wales Department
of Health that radical organization did
an independent trial over three years to
look at ten years of the work we've been
doing in these sorts of project in New
South Wales and they found a 40%
reduction in hospital admissions for the
illnesses that you could attribute to
the poor environment a 40% reduction
just to show that the principles we've
used in Australia can be used in other
places I'm just going to go to one other
place that's Nepal and what a beautiful
place to go we were asked to by a small
village of 600 people to go in and make
toilets where none existed health was
poor we went in with no grand plan no
grand promises of a great program just
the offer to build two toilets for two
families it was during the design of the
first toilet that I went for lunch
invited by the family into their main
room of the house it was choking with
smoke people were cooking on their only
fuel source green timber the smoke
coming off that timber is choking and in
an enclosed house you simply can't
breathe later we found the leading cause
of illness and death in this particular
region is through respiratory failure so
all of a sudden we had two problems we
were there originally to look at toilets
and get human waste off the ground
that's fine but all of a sudden now
there was a second problem how do we
actually get the smoke down so two
problems and design should be about more
than one thing solution take human waste
take animal waste put it into a chamber
out of that extract biogas methane gas
the gas gives three to four hours
cooking a day clean smokeless and free
for the family
I put it to you is this eliminating
poverty and the answer from the Nepali
team who's working at the minute would
say don't be ridiculous we have three
million more toilets to build before we
could even make a stab at that claim and
I don't pretend anything else but as we
all sit here today there are now over a
hundred toilets built in this village
and a couple nearby well over a thousand
people use those toilets yummy Lama he's
a young boy
he's got significantly less gut
infection because he's now got toilets
and there isn't human waste on the
ground Kojima she's a mother and a proud
one she's probably right now cooking
lunch for her family on biogas smokeless
fuel her lungs have got better and
they'll get better as time increases cuz
she's not cooking in the same smoke
Surya takes the waste out of the biogas
chamber when it's shed the gas he puts
it on his crops
he's trebled his crop income more food
for the family and more money for the
family and finally Bishnu the the leader
of the team has now understood that not
only have we built toilets we've also
built a team and that team is now
working in two villages where they're
training up the next two villages to
keep the work expanding and that to me
is the key
[Music]
people are not the problem we've never
found that the problem poor living
environment poor housing and the bugs
that do people harm none of those are
limited by geography by skin color or by
religion none of them the common link
between all the work we've had to do is
one thing and that's poverty Nelson
Mandela said in the mid 2000 not too far
from here he said that like slavery and
apartheid poverty is not natural it's
man-made and can be overcome and
eradicated by the actions of human
beings I want to win by saying it's been
the actions of thousands of ordinary
human beings doing I think extraordinary
work that have actually improved health
and maybe only in a small way reduce
poverty thank you very much
[Applause]
you